with us yonti cpto who's the president
and chief executive at save the children
in the US joining us from Weston in
Connecticut thanks for your time you
yourself were at the ra Crossing in
January and you saw several items that
were rejected what surprised you the
most well thank you Daren um what
surprised me the most quite a few things
I saw a wooden toy box with games for
children being rejected because the the
box was made of wood and it had to
repack in and boxes I saw hygiene kits
with soap and blankets and sanitary pads
for women rejected because there was a
nail clipper in it so the that that list
goes on and I think the key thing here
is also it is very unpredictable which
trucks can make it into Gaza and which
ones are rejected so I saw hundreds of
trucks there at the cross in arish
waiting for their turn some of them were
there for the second or third time and
then some sometimes they did get in
because there was authoriz given for
those drugs sometimes they were returned
sometimes they got in on the second or
third time so it is that level of
unpredictability and the sheer
inadequacy of the number of supplies
that are coming in that is making the
delivery of good humanitarian assistance
at scale so complicated in Gaza today so
from what you saw what did they actually
allow in and in what sorts of
quantities they allowed in basic food
items blankets clean water in in in
bottles um flour so some of that made it
in it was just wellfully inadequate even
at the time and this was late January we
saw when I was there there were about
130 trucks on average per day going in
versus the 500 trucks that were going in
before uh October 7th now we're what
five six weeks later we're now looking
at a further diminishment of the number
of trucks being allowed in so that is a
real problem and aside from that even if
trucks make it into Gaza then
distribution inside Gaza is still hugely
problematic partly because of the
deconfliction and the violence that you
just talked about earlier that is still
going on it's making it unsafe for us to
do our work and unsafe for the
communities we are trying to help and it
is there is so much rubble and
destruction around that it is physically
even hard to actually get to The Last
Mile in order to deliver our our
supplies when they make it in right so
how do organizations like yours than uh
deal with what seems to be from what
you're describing a completely chaotic
uh
situation it is chaotic it is wly
inadequate and the situation is getting
worse by the minute we are now hearing
reports from children starving to death
literally starving to death completely
unnecessarily aside from the injuries
and and the The Killing that's been
going on because of uh the lack of a
ceasefire
um what we're doing we're trying to do
our utmost we have about 30 colleagues
inside mostly Palestinians with a with a
number of international colleagues there
we are trying to do everything we can we
can to get life saving Aid to people to
get medicins to hospitals to get um um
malnutrition treatment to children when
we can but it is severely impacted we
would love to do we would we can do much
much more but again we need a ceasefire
we need many more trucks coming in
Overland we have no time to wait for a
sea um uh solution however creative uh
it is um and and we need that
deconfliction so that that assurance
that our convoys our locations our
offices our warehouses are kept safe in
order to do our work but I mean this is
Israel's response they say that Israel
assists encourages and facilitates the
entry of humanitarian aid for the
residents of the Gaza Strip and for
medical and other critical
infrastructures in the strip but clearly
uh that's not what you saw what's your
response to what they have to
say it's a drip feed I mean if if
facilitation is to get 50 60 trucks a
day in whereas what we need is 500 um
I'm not quite sure what the definition
really means um so we have seen a number
of times that trucks that want to go to
the north where still
15% of the population is they've had
almost nothing since uh over the past
number of weeks and months people are
eating tree leaves they're mixing animal
Foods uh with whatever flour they can
find in order to make bread I mean it is
really dire up in the north if if it's
even if it's also bad in Rafa so we do
not see in practice on the ground that
facilitation working okay we thank you
so much for joining us from
Connecticut thank you
well